THE FOUR VERTEX THEOREM AND ITS CONVERSE
Dennis DeTurck, Herman Gluck, Daniel Pomerleano, David Shea Vick
Dedicated to the memory of Björn Dahlberg

Abstract
The Four Vertex Theorem, one of the earliest results in global differential
geometry, says that a simple closed curve in the plane, other than a circle,
must have at least four "vertices", that is, at least four points where the
curvature has a local maximum or local minimum. In 1909 Syamadas
Mukhopadhyaya proved this for strictly convex curves in the plane, and in
1912 Adolf Kneser proved it for all simple closed curves in the plane, not
just the strictly convex ones.
The Converse to the Four Vertex Theorem says that any continuous realvalued function on the circle which has at least two local maxima and two
local minima is the curvature function of a simple closed curve in the plane.
In 1971 Herman Gluck proved this for strictly positive preassigned curvature,
and in 1997 Björn Dahlberg proved the full converse, without the restriction
that the curvature be strictly positive. Publication was delayed by Dahlberg's
untimely death in January 1998, but his paper was edited afterwards by
Vilhelm Adolfsson and Peter Kumlin, and finally appeared in 2005.
The work of Dahlberg completes the almost hundred-year-long thread of
ideas begun by Mukhopadhyaya, and we take this opportunity to provide a
self-contained exposition.

August, 2006

1

I. Why is the Four Vertex Theorem true?
1. A simple construction.
A counter-example would be a simple closed curve in the plane whose curvature
is nonconstant, has one minimum and one maximum, and is weakly monotonic
on the two arcs between them. We will try to build such a curve from a few arcs
of circles, fail, and see why. Consider the figure below.

Think of the circles above as train tracks. Our curve will be traced out by a train
which travels along these circular tracks, switching from one to another at the
labeled junction points.
Let the train start at point 1 on the bottom of the largest circle, giving the minimum
curvature there. It then moves off to the right along this large circle, comes to the
point 2, and switches there to a smaller circle, increasing its curvature.
The important thing to note is that the vertical diameter of this smaller circle is
displaced to the right of the vertical diameter of the original circle.
To keep things brief, we let the train stay on this second circle until it comes to the
top at the point 3, which is to the right of the vertical diameter of the original circle.

2

Then we go back to the beginning, start the train once again at the bottom of the
original circle, relabel this point 1' , and now let the train move off to the left. It
switches to a smaller circle at point 2', and comes to the top of this circle at 3',
which is now to the left of the vertical diameter of the original circle.
If the curved path of the train is to form a convex simple closed curve, then the top
points 3 and 3' should coincide...but they don't. So the curve does not exist.
No matter how many circles we use, we get the same contradiction: the curve
can not close up while staying simple, and therefore does not exist.
But if we permit a self-intersection, then it's easy to get just one maximum and one
minimum for the curvature.

The equation of the above curve in polar coordinates is r = — 1 — 2 sin θ .
The curvature takes its minimum value of 5/9 at the bottom of the big loop, its
maximum value of 3 at the bottom of the small loop, and is monotonic in between.

3

II. Osserman's proof of the Four Vertex Theorem.
2. Consider the circumscribed circle.
In 1985, Robert Osserman gave a simple proof of the Four Vertex Theorem in
which all cases, strictly positive or mixed positive and negative curvature, are
treated on an equal footing. At the beginning of his paper, Osserman says,
"The essence of the proof may be distilled in a single phrase:
consider the circumscribed circle."
Let E be a fixed nonempty compact set in the plane. Among all circles C which
enclose E , there is a unique smallest one, the circumscribed circle.

What can C ∩ E look like ?
(1) C must meet E , otherwise C could be made smaller and still enclose E .
(2) C ∩ E can not lie in an open semi-circle. Otherwise we could shift C a bit,
without changing its size, so that the new C still encloses E but does not meet it.
But this would contradict (1).
(3) Thus C ∩ E has at least two points, and if only these, then they must be
antipodal. This happens when E is an ellipse.

4

3. An overview of Osserman's proof.
OSSERMAN'S THEOREM. Let α be a simple closed curve of class C2 in the
plane, and C the circumscribed circle. If α ∩ C has at least n components,
then α has at least 2n vertices.
Here are the major steps in the proof.
(1) Let R be the radius of the circumscribed circle C , and K = 1/R its curvature.
If α ∩ C has at least n components, then α has at least n vertices where the
curvature κ satisfies κ ≥ K , and at least n more vertices where κ < K .
Caution. We do not claim that the six points shown in the figure below are vertices.
But if you find six consecutive points on the curve α where the curvature goes up
and down as shown, then you can replace them by six vertices of α , three of them
local maxima and three local minima. We leave it to the reader to check this simple
assertion.

It is clear from this picture how we get the n points where κ ≥ K .
To get the ones inbetween, where κ < K , we proceed as follows.
5

Let P1 , P2 , ..., Pn be n points in counterclockwise order on the circle C ,
one from each component of C ∩ α . Since C ∩ α cannot lie in an open
semi-circle, we can choose these points so that the arc of C from each point
to the next is no larger than a semi-circle.
Now focus on the arc C1 of C from P1 to P2 , and on the corresponding arc α1
of the curve α . We have arranged for the convenience of description that the
line connecting P1 and P2 is vertical.
The arc α1 of α is tangent to C at P1 and P2 , and does not lie entirely along C .
It therefore contains a point Q which is not on C1 , yet lies to the right of the
vertical line connecting P1 and P2 . Consider the circle C' through P1 , Q and P2 .

Since Q is in the interior of C , and since C1 is no larger than a semicircle, it
follows that the circle C' is larger than C . Hence its curvature K' < K .

6

Now gradually translate the circle C' to the left, until it last touches α1 at the
point Q1 .

At Q1 , the curvature κ of α must satisfy κ(Q1) ≤ K' < K , which is exactly
what we wanted to show.

7

(2) Bonus clause. The components of α ∩ C are either single points or closed
arcs. For each component which is an arc rather than a single point, we can get
two extra vertices, over and above the 2n vertices promised by Osserman's
theorem.
The picture of α below is roughly the same as before, but we have distorted it
so that an entire arc of α about the point P2 coincides with an arc of the circle C .
The curvature of α at P2 is now exactly κ . But in addition, there must be points
of α to either side of this arc, arbitrarily close to it, where the curvature κ of α
is > K . Two such points are shown in the figure, and marked R2 and R2' .
As a result, the point P2 , where the curvature of α used to be larger than the
curvature at the two neighboring marked points, has been demoted, and the
curvature of α at P2 is now less than that at the two neighboring marked points.
In this way, we have gained two extra vertices for α .

(3) It can happen that α ∩ C has only one component, which must then be a
closed arc on C greater than or equal to a semi-circle. Osserman's theorem
promises that α has at least two vertices, and the bonus clause promises two
more.
(4) Thus Osserman's theorem, together with the bonus clause, yields the Four
Vertex Theorem.
8

III. The converse in the case of strictly positive curvature.
FULL CONVERSE TO THE FOUR VERTEX THEOREM. Let κ: S1 → R
be a continuous function which is either a nonzero constant or else has at least
two local maxima and two local minima. Then there is an embedding α: S1 → R2
whose curvature at the point α(t) is κ(t) for all t ∊ S1 .

4. Basic idea of the proof for strictly positive curvature.
We use a winding number argument in the group of diffeomorphisms of the circle,
as follows.
Let κ: S1 → R be any continuous strictly positive curvature function, and for the
moment think of the parameter along S1 as the angle of inclination θ of the
desired curve. Since this curve will usually not close up, it is better to cut S1 open
into the interval [0, 2π] .
There is a unique map α: [0, 2π] → R2 which begins at the origin and has unit
tangent vector (cos θ, sin θ) and curvature κ(θ) at the point α(θ) . In fact, if s
is arc length along this curve, then the equations
dα/ds = (cos θ, sin θ)

and

dθ/ds = κ(θ)

quickly lead to the explicit formula
θ

α(θ) = ∫0 (cos θ, sin θ) dθ / κ(θ) .

9

The error vector E = α(2π) — α(0) measures the failure of our curve to
close up.

If the curvature function κ has at least two local maxima and two local minima,
we will show how to find a loop of diffeomorphisms h of the circle so that when
we construct, as above, curves αh: [0, 2π] → R2 whose curvature at the point αh(θ)
is κ ◦ h(θ) , the corresponding error vectors E(h) will wind once around the origin.
Furthermore, we will do this so that the loop is contractible in the group Diff(S 1) of
diffeomorphisms of the circle, and conclude that for some h "inside" this loop, the
curve αh will have error vector E(h) = 0 , and hence close up to form a smooth
simple closed curve.
Its curvature at the point αh(θ) is κ ◦ h(θ) , so if we write αh(θ) = αh ◦ h—1 ◦ h(θ) ,
and let h(θ) = t , then its curvature at the point αh ◦ h—1(t) is κ(t) . Therefore
α = αh ◦ h—1 is a reparametrization of the same curve, whose curvature at the
point α(t) is κ(t) .

10

5. How do we find such a loop of diffeomorphisms?
The first step is to replace κ by a simpler curvature function.
Using the hypothesis that κ has at least two local maxima and two local minima,
we find positive numbers 0 < a < b such that κ takes the values a , b , a , b at
four points in order around the circle. We then find a preliminary diffeomorphism
h1 of the circle so that the function κ ◦ h1 is ε-close in measure to a step function
κ0 with values a , b , a , b on four successive arcs of length π/2 each, in the sense
that κ ◦ h1 is within ε of κ0 on almost all of S1 , except on a set of measure < ε .

If the curvature functions κ ◦ h1 and κ0 are ε-close in measure, then the corresponding curves are easily seen to be C1-close. With this in mind, we will focus
attention on the curvature step function κ0 and ignore the original curvature
function κ until almost the end of the argument.
Given this shift of attention, we next find a contractible loop of diffeomorphisms h
of the circle so that the error vectors E(h) for the curvature step functions κ0 ◦ h
wind once around the origin, as in the picture below.

11

A curve tries unsuccessfully to close up

12

6. How do we read this picture?
The picture has eight portions, located at the eight points of the compass.
Each contains a small circle which shows a curvature step function κ0 ◦ h , and a
larger curve which realizes it, with common parameter the angle of inclination θ .
This larger curve is built from four circular arcs, two cut from a circle of curvature a
and two from a circle of curvature b . Heavier markings indicate the larger circle.
The curves fail to close up, and we show their error vectors. The figures are arranged
so that the one in the east has an error vector pointing east, the one in the northeast
has an error vector pointing northeast, and so on.
The eight diffeomorphisms h are samples from a loop of diffeomorphisms of the
circle, and the corresponding error vectors E(h) wind once around the origin. The
loop is contractible in Diff(S1) because each diffeomorphism leaves the bottom point
of the circle fixcd. The precise description of such a family of diffeomorphisms of the
circle is given in Gluck (1971), but we think there is enough information in the above
picture for the reader to work out the details. This picture can be seen in animated
form at our website, www.math.upenn.edu/~deturck/fourvertex.
Since the loop of diffeomorphisms is contractible in Diff(S1) , it follows that for
some other diffeomorphism h of the circle, the corresponding curve with curvature
κ0 ◦ h has error vector zero, and therefore closes up. This is hardly news: if h is the
identity, then the curve with curvature κ0 closes up, as shown below.

Preassign κ0

Get this "bicircle"

But the point is that the above argument is robust, and hence applies equally well to
the curvature function κ ◦ h1 which is ε-close in measure to κ0 , since the corresponding curves are C1-close. Hence there must also be a diffeomorphism h of the
circle so that the curve with curvature κ ◦ h1 ◦ h has error vector zero, and therefore
closes up to form a strictly convex simple closed curve. Reparametrizing this curve as
in section 4 shows that it realizes the preassigned curvature function κ , completing
the proof of the converse to the Four Vertex Theorem for strictly positive curvature.
13

7. Why does this argument sound familiar?
Proving something that is obvious by using a robust argument reminds us of the
proof that the polynomial p0(z) = an zn has a zero by noting that it takes any circle
in the complex plane to a curve which winds n times around the origin. After all,
it is obvious that p0(z) has a zero at the origin.
But this argument is also robust, and applies equally well to the polynomial
p(z) = an zn + an—1 zn—1 + ... + a1 z + a0 ,
when z moves around a suitably large circle, giving us the usual topological proof
of the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra.

8. Where does our winding number argument come from?
Here is a higher-dimensional result proved in Gluck (1972).
GENERALIZED MINKOWSKI THEOREM. Let K: Sn → R , for n ≥ 2 ,
be a continuous, strictly positive function. Then there exists an embedding
α: Sn → Rn+1 onto a closed convex hypersurface whose Gaussian curvature
at the point α(p) is K(p) for all p ∊ Sn .
The proof of this theorem is by a degree argument in the diffeomorphism group
of the n-sphere Sn . The hypothesis that n ≥ 2 is used to guarantee the existence
of a diffeomorphism which arbitrarily permutes any finite number of points. This
hypothesis fails for n = 1 , but when we rewrite the argument in this case, we get
the winding number proof of the converse to the Four Vertex Theorem for strictly
positive curvature described above.

14

9. Building curves from arcs of circles.
Before we leave this section, we record the following observation of Dahlberg, and
save it for later use.
PROPOSITION 9.1. A plane curve, built with four arcs cut in alternation from
two different size circles, and assembled so that the tangent line turns continuously
through an angle of 2π , will close up if and only if opposite arcs are equal in length.
Evidence for this proposition is provided by the preceding figure of a bicircle,
and the large figure before that, containing eight separate curves which fail to
close up.
Proof. We parametrize such a curve by the angle of inclination θ of its tangent line,
suppose that 0 < a < b are the curvatures of the two circles to be used, and record
the curvature function κ(θ) in the figure below.

15

If α(θ) is the resulting curve, then its error vector is given by
E = α(2π) — α(0) = ∫02π eiθ ds = ∫02π eiθ ds/dθ dθ = ∫02π eiθ / κ(θ) dθ .
We evaluate this explicitly as a sum of four integrals, and get
E = (1/ia — 1/ib) ( [exp(iθ2) — exp(iθ1)] + [exp(iθ4) — exp(iθ3)] ) .
We are left with the question of whether the two vectors shown below add up to
zero.

The picture makes the answer obvious and proves the proposition.

16

IV. Dahlberg's proof of the Full Converse to the Four Vertex Theorem.
10. Dahlberg's key idea.
When asked to draw a simple closed curve in the plane with strictly positive
curvature, and another one with mixed positive and negative curvature,
a typical response might be...

But for mixed positive and negative curvature, Dahlberg envisioned the following
curve.

Its four major subarcs are almost circular. They are connected by four small wiggly
arcs, each of which has an almost constant tangent direction, but largely varying
curvature, including negative curvature. This curve "marginalizes" its negative
curvature and emphasizes its positive curvature, and from a distance looks like a
bicircle.
Dahlberg's Key Idea. You can construct such a curve with any preassigned
curvature which has at least two local maxima and two local minima. You can
use the winding number argument to get it to close up smoothly, and you can
also make it C1 close to a fixed convex curve, which will imply that it is simple.

17

11. Dahlberg's proof plan.
The overall plan is to follow the winding number line of argument from the strictly
positive curvature case, preserving the prominent role played by two-valued curvature step functions, but mindful of the need for the following changes.
(1) A smooth simple closed curve with strictly positive curvature has a distinguished
parametrization by the angle of inclination of its tangent line. This doesn't work in
general, so another parametrization scheme is needed.
(2) A smooth closed curve with strictly positive curvature whose tangent line turns
through an angle of 2π is automatically simple. This is false in general, and part
of Dahlberg's Key Idea is to force the curve to be C1 close to a fixed convex curve
in order to make it simple.
To accomplish this, he exhibits a 2-cell D in Diff(S1) , centered at the identity,
and satisfying a certain transversality condition which guarantees that the winding
number argument will work using arbitrarily small loops in D about its center.

18

12. Finding the right parametrization.
Choose, as common domain for all our curves, the unit circle S1 with arc length s
as parameter. Since most of the curves will fail to close up, cut the circle open at
the point (1,0) and think of the interval [0, 2π] as the domain. All the curves will
have length 2π , and at the end will be scaled up or down to modify their curvature.
We make sure the total curvature is always 2π as follows. Given a preassigned
curvature function κ: S1 → R which is not identically zero, evaluate ∫02π κ(s) ds .
If this is zero, precede κ by a preliminary diffeomorphism of S1 so as to make the
integral nonzero, but still call the composition κ . Then rescale this new κ by a
constant c so that
∫02π c κ(s) ds = 2π .
When we later modify this curvature function by another diffeomorphism
h: S1 → S1 , we will rescale the new curvature function κ ◦ h by a constant ch
so that the total curvature is again 2π :
∫02π ch κ ◦ h(s) ds = 2π .
We then build a curve αh: [0, 2π] → R2 parametrized by arc length which begins
at the origin, αh(0) = (0, 0) , starts off in the direction of the positive x-axis,
αh'(0) = (1, 0) , and whose curvature at the point αh(s) is ch κ ◦ h(s) .
The curve αh is uniquely determined by these requirements.
The effect of these arrangements is that all our curves begin and end up pointing
horizontally to the right. If any such curve closes up, it does so smoothly. Thus,
just as in the positive curvature case, the emphasis is on getting the curve to close up.
At the end, using ideas expressed above, we will make sure the final curve is simple.

19

13. Configuration space.
Defining a configuration space of four ordered points on a circle will help us
visualize the arguments to come, and aid us in carrying out the transversality
arguments mentioned in the proof plan.
As in the positive curvature case, we use the hypothesis that κ has at least two
local maxima and two local minima to find positive numbers 0 < a < b so that
κ takes the values a , b , a , b at four points in order around the circle. The only
difference here is that we might first have to change the sign of κ to accomplish this.
Then we find a preliminary diffeomorphism h1 of the circle so that the function
κ ◦ h1 is ε-close in measure to the step function κ0 with values a , b , a , b on the
arcs [0 , π/2) , [π/2 , π) , [π , 3π/2) , [3π/2 , 2π) .
As before, we focus on the step function κ0 and its compositions κ0 ◦ h as h
ranges over Diff(S1) . These are all step functions with the values a , b , a , b
on the four arcs determined by some four points p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 in order on S1 .
For each such step function, we follow Dahlberg's parametrization scheme from
the previous section to construct a curve from circular arcs with curvatures
proportional to a , b , a , b , scaled up or down to make the total curvature 2π .
Let E(p1 , p2 , p3 , p4) denote the error vector for this curve.
To think visually about all this, let CS denote the configuration space of ordered
4-tuples (p1 , p2 , p3 , p4) of distinct points on the unit circle S1 , arranged in
counterclockwise order, as shown below.

The configuration space CS is diffeomorphic to S1 × R3 .
20

The error vector E(p1 , p2 , p3 , p4) defines an error map E: CS → R2 . The
vanishing of the error vector is the signal that the curve closes up. We will call the
set of such points the core of the configuration space CS , and denote it by CS0 .
We noted in Proposition 9.1 that a curve built with four arcs cut in alternation from
two different size circles will close up if and only if opposite arcs are equal in
length.
Thus a point (p1 , p2 , p3 , p4) of CS lies in the core if and only if p1 and p3 are
antipodal, and also p2 and p4 are antipodal. A nice exercise for the reader is to
check that this condition holds if and only if the equation p1 — p2 + p3 — p4 = 0
holds in the complex plane.
The core CS0 is diffeomorphic to S1 × R1 .

21

14. Reduced configuration space.
To aid in visualization, and also to help with our proof of the required transversality
results, we define the reduced configuration space RCS ⊂ CS to be the subset
where p1 = (1, 0) = 1 + 0 i = 1 . Then RCS is homeomorphic to R3 and we
use the group structure on S1 to express the homeomorphism S1 × RCS → CS
by

(eiθ, (1 , p , q , r)) → (eiθ, eiθp , eiθq, eiθr) .
For the purpose of drawing pictures, we change coordinates by writing
p = e2πix , q = e2πiy and r = e2πiz .
Then RCS ≅ {(x, y, z) : 0 < x < y < z < 1}.

The reduced configuration space appears as an open solid tetrahedron

22

A point (1, p, q, r) in RCS is in the core if and only if 1 and q are antipodal, and
also p and r are antipodal. We let RCS0 = RCS ∩ CS0 denote the core of the
reduced configuration space.
In the x, y, z coordinates for RCS , the core RCS0 is given by
0 < x < y = ½ < z = x + ½ < 1,
and appears as the open line segment connecting (0, ½, ½) to (½, ½, 1) .

The core of the reduced configuration space.
The reduced configuration space has an added advantage which derives from the
fact that when we build curves in the plane by cutting the unit circle open at the
point 1 , this is already one of the four division points for an element (1, p, q, r)
in RCS. This simplifies the construction of the curve, and the computation of its
error vector E(1, p, q, r) , and we make use of this in the following section.

23

15. The topology of the error map.
The error map E: CS → R2 takes the core CS0 to the origin, and the
complement of the core to the complement of the origin.
Let λ be a loop in CS — CS0 which is null-homologous in CS but links
the core CS0 once. For convenience, we go down one dimension and show
this loop in RCS — RCS0 .

Any two such loops in CS — CS0 are homotopic to one another, up to sign.
PROPOSITION 15.1. The image of the loop λ under the error map E has
winding number ±1 about the origin in R2 .
What this proposition says in effect is that plane curves, built with four arcs cut in
alternation from two different size circles, are capable of exhibiting the winding
number phenomenon which makes the proof of the converse to the Four Vertex
Theorem actually work.

24

Proposition 15.1 is an immediate consequence of the transversality result below.
PROPOSITION 15.2. The differential of the error map E: RCS → R2 is
surjective at each point of the core.
Proof. We are given distinct positive numbers 0 < a < b and a point
P = (1 , p2 , p3 , p4) in RCS. Let L1 , L2 , L3 , L4 denote the lengths of the
four arcs 1p1 , p1p2 , p2p3 , p31 on the unit circle. Scale a and b up or down to
new values a(P) and b(P) , preserving their ratio, to achieve total curvature 2π :
a(P) L1 + b(P) L2 + a(P) L3 + b(P) L4 = 2π .
Then construct a curve α: [0, 2π] → R2 according to Dahlberg's plan: begin
at the origin and head in the direction of the positive x-axis along circles of
curvatures a(P) , b(P) , a(P) , b(P) for lengths L1 , L2 , L3 , L4 . The error vector
E(P) = α(2π) — α(0) indicates the failure to close up.
Consider the figure below, which shows the points 1 , p2 , p3 , p4 on the unit circle
parametrized by arc length s , and the corresponding division points 1 , q2 , q3 , q4
on the unit circle parametrized by angle of inclination θ .

angle of inclination θ

arc length s

This momentary switch in loyalty from the arc length parameter s to the angle of
inclination parameter θ will be rewarded by an explicit formula for the error map
which makes the proof of the current proposition easy.

25

The map
P = (1 , p2 , p3 , p4) → Q = (1 , q2 , q3 , q4)
is a diffeomorphism from the s-parametrized version of RCS to a θ-parametrized
version, taking the core 1 — p2 + p3 — p4 to the core 1 — q2 + q3 — q4 .
This alternative version of RCS helps us to calculate the error map. First note that
E(P) = ∫02π ei θ(s) ds = ∫02π ei θ (ds/dθ) dθ = ∫02π ei θ / κ(θ) dθ .
This can be computed explicitly as a sum of four integrals, and we get
E(P) = (1 / i b(P) — 1 / i a(P)) (1 — q2 + q3 — q4) .
The differential of this map is particularly easy to compute along the core, since
the vanishing of the expression 1 — q2 + q3 — q4 = 0 there frees us from the
need to consider the rate of change of the factor (1 / i b(P) — 1 / i a(P)).
If we move q2 counterclockwise at unit speed along the circle, we have
dq2/dt = i q2 , and hence
dE/dq2 = (1 / i b(P) — 1 / i a(P)) (— i q2) .
Likewise,

dE/dq3 = (1 / i b(P) — 1 / i a(P)) ( i q3) .

These two rates of change are independent because q2 and q3 are always distinct,
and along the core they can not be antipodal. It follows that the differential of the
error map is surjective at each point of the core of the θ-parametrized version of
RCS. Since the map between the two versions of RCS is a diffeomorphism
taking core to core, the same result holds for our original s-parametrized version of
RCS, completing the proof of the proposition.

26

16. Dahlberg's disk D .
Dahlberg's choice of 2-cell D ⊂ Diff(S1) consists of the special Möbius
transformations
gβ(z) = (z — β) / (1 —β z) ,
where |β| < 1 and β is the complex conjugate of β .

The action of gβ on the unit disk in the complex plane
These special Möbius transformations are all isometries of the Poincaré disk model
of the hyperbolic plane. The transformation g0 is the identity, and if β ≠ 0 , then
gβ is a hyperbolic translation of the line through 0 and β which takes β to 0 and
0 to —β . The point β/|β| and its antipode —β/|β| on S1 (the circle at infinity) are
the only fixed points of gβ .
A unit complex number eiθ acts by multiplication on the Poincaré disk model
of the hyperbolic plane, and as such is a hyperbolic isometry which rotates the disk
by angle θ about its center. These rotations interact with Dahlberg's transformations
gβ by the intertwining formula
geiθβ (eiθ z) = eiθ gβ (z) .

27

17. The second transversality result.
Let gβ be a point in Dahlberg's disk D , and P = (p1 , p2 , p3 , p4) a point in
the configuration space CS . We define
gβ(P) = (gβ(p1) , gβ(p2) , gβ(p3) , gβ(p4)) ,
so that now D acts on CS .
PROPOSITION 17.1. The evaluation map CS0 × D → CS defined by
(P, gβ) → gβ(P) is a diffeomorphism.
Proof. The evaluation map CS0 × D → CS is smooth. To visualize it, start with
a point P = (p1 , p2 , p3 , p4) in the core CS0 and a transformation gβ in D
which takes P to Q = (q1 , q2 , q3 , q4) . In the Poincaré disk, the geodesic with
ends at p1 and p3 is a straight line through the origin, and likewise for the geodesic
with ends at p2 and p4 . The isometry gβ takes them to geodesics with ends at
q1 and q3 , respectively q2 and q4 , which appear to the Euclidean eye as circular
arcs meeting the unit circle orthogonally, and intersecting one another at the point
gβ(0) = —β .

28

Vice versa, suppose we start with the point Q = (q1 , q2 , q3 , q4) in CS . Draw
the hyperbolic lines, that is, circles orthogonal to the boundary of the disk, with
ends at q1 and q3 , likewise q2 and q4 . The intersection point of these two
circular arcs varies smoothly with the four end points.
Call this intersection point —β . The transformation g—β takes the point —β to
the origin, and hence takes the two hyperbolic lines through —β to lines through
the origin. It follows that P = g—β(Q) lies in the core CS0 , and that gβ(P) = Q .
The association Q → (P, gβ) provides a smooth inverse to the evaluation map
CS0 × D → CS , showing it to be a diffeomorphism.
COROLLARY 17.2. For each fixed point P in the core CS0 , the evaluation
map gβ → gβ(P) is a smooth embedding of Dahlberg's disk D into CS which
meets the core transversally at the point P and nowhere else.
This follows directly from Proposition 17.1.

29

18. The image of Dahlberg's disk in the reduced configuration space.
We seek a concrete picture of Dahlberg's disk D in action. Recall from the preceding section that for any point P = (p1 , p2 , p3 , p4) in CS , the correspondence
gβ → (gβ(p1) , gβ(p2) , gβ(p3) , gβ(p4))
maps D into CS . If we start with the point P0 = (1 , i, —1 , —i) , and then follow
the above map by the projection of CS to RCS , we get the correspondence
gβ → (1, gβ(1)—1gβ(i) , gβ(1)—1gβ(—1) , gβ(1)—1gβ(—i)) .
If we convert to xyz-coordinates so that RCS is the open solid tetrahedron introduced in section 14, then the image of D is shown below. In the picture on the left,
the tetrahedron has its usual position; on the right, it is rotated so as to clearly display
the negative curvature of the image disk.

Dahlberg's disk D mapped into the tetrahedron - two views
These computer drawn pictures of the image of D clearly show that its boundary
lies along four of the six edges of the tetrahedron. This is a reflection of the fact
that as β approaches the boundary of the unit disk, the special Möbius transformation gβ leaves the point β/|β| on the boundary circle fixed, but moves all other
points on the boundary circle towards the antipodal point —β/|β| . Hence the four
points 1, gβ(1)—1gβ(i) , gβ(1)—1gβ(—1) , gβ(1)—1gβ(—i) limit to at most two points.
This "double degeneracy" corresponds to edges (rather than faces) of the tetrahedron.

30

19. Dahlberg's proof.
We are given a continuous curvature function κ: S1 → R which has at least two
local maxima and two local minima, and must find an embedding α: S1 → R2
whose curvature at the point α(t) is κ(t) for all t ∊ S1 .
Step 1. We temporarily replace κ by a curvature step function κ0 ,
to which we apply the winding number argument.
Changing the sign of κ if necessary, there are constants 0 < a < b so that
κ takes the values a , b , a , b at four points in succession along S1 . Let κ0
denote the curvature step function which takes these same values along the four
quarter-circles with end points at 1 , i , —1 , —i .
Given any ε > 0 , we can find a preliminary diffeomorphism h1 of the circle so
that the curvature function κ ◦ h1 is ε-close in measure to κ0 . We then rescale
both κ0 and κ ◦ h1 to have total curvature 2π . They will again be ε-close in
measure, for some new small ε .
We apply the winding number argument to the curvature step function κ0 as follows.
Consider the point P0 = (1, i , —1 , —i) in the core CS0 of the configuration
space CS , and map Dahlberg's disk D into CS by sending gβ → gβ(P0) .
By Corollary 17.2, this evaluation map is a smooth embedding of D into CS
which meets the core CS0 transversally at the point P0 and nowhere else.
By Proposition 15.1, each loop |β| = constant in D is sent by the composition
D —evaluation map→ CS —error map→ R2
into a loop in R2 — origin with winding number ±1 about the origin.
We translate this conclusion into more concrete terms as follows.
Let c(β) κ0 ◦ gβ be the rescaling of the curvature step function κ0 ◦ gβ which has
total curvature 2π , and let α(β) : [0, 2π] → R2 be the corresponding arc-length
parametrized curve with this curvature function. As β circles once around the
origin, the corresponding loop of error vectors E(α(β)) has winding number ±1
about the origin.

31

Step 2. We transfer this winding number argument to the curvature function κ .
Let c(h1, β) κ ◦ h1 ◦ gβ be the rescaling of the curvature function κ ◦ h1 ◦ gβ
which has total curvature 2π , and let α(h1, β) : [0, 2π] → R2 be the corresponding arc-length parametrized curve with this curvature function.
Fixing |β| , we can choose ε sufficiently small so that each curve α(h1, β) is
C1-close to the curve α(β) constructed in Step 1. Then as β circles once around
the origin, the corresponding loop of error vectors E(α(h1, β)) will also have
winding number ±1 about the origin. Note that we only need C0-close for this step.
It follows that there is a diffeomorphism gβ' with |β'| ≤ |β| so that E(α(h1, β')) = 0 ,
which tells us that the curve α(h1, β') closes up smoothly. If |β| and ε are sufficiently small, then the closed curve α(h1, β') will be as C1-close as we like to the
fixed bicircle with curvature c0 κ0 , and will hence be simple.
The simple closed curve α(h1, β') realizes the curvature function c(h1, β') κ ◦ h1 ◦ gβ' .
Rescaling it realizes the curvature function κ ◦ h1 ◦ gβ' , and then reparametrizing it
realizes the curvature function κ .
This completes Dahlberg's proof of the Converse to the Four Vertex Theorem.

32

20. Extensions and generalizations of the Four Vertex Theorem.
The Four Vertex Theorem for planar curves may be generalized in the following
ways:
(1) by considering more general surfaces than just the Euclidean plane;
(2) by relaxing the condition that the curve be simple;
(3) by considering space curves; and
(4) by seeking conditions which would ensure the existence of more than
four vertices.
Some generalizations go in several of these directions at the same time.
(1) The consideration of more general surfaces was initiated by Jackson (1945),
who showed that any simple closed curve which lies on a surface of constant
curvature in Euclidean space, and is null-homotopic on that surface, has at least
four vertices, meaning local maxima or local minima of the geodesic curvature.
See also Thorbergsson (1976).
(2) The generalization to nonsimple curves was initiated by Pinkall (1987), who
showed that if a closed planar curve bounds an immersed surface in the plane, then
it must have at least four vertices. He also pointed out that there exist closed curves
of any rotation index which have only two vertices.
The generalizations of Jackson and Pinkall may be combined to show that any closed
curve on a complete orientable 2-manifold of constant curvature, which bounds an
immersed disk, has at least four vertices. See Maeda (1998) and Costa and Firer
(2000).

33

(3) The generalization to space curves stems from the observation that stereographic
projection maps the vertices of a planar curve to vertices (with respect to geodesic
curvature) of its image on the sphere. This is a special case of the more general
phenomenon that any conformal transformation of a surface preserves the vertices.
On a sphere, however, the points where the geodesic curvature vanishes correspond
to points of vanishing torsion. Thus the fact that a spherical curve has at least four
points of vanishing torsion may be considered a generalization of the Four Vertex
Theorem in the plane. Sedykh (1994) showed that this result holds for all space
curves which lie on the boundary of their convex hull, thus proving a conjecture of
Scherk.
(4) The first result seeking more than four vertices is that of Osserman (1985)
discussed earlier in this paper. Another generalization was initiated by Pinkall, who
had conjectured that if a planar curve bounds an immersed surface of genus g ,
then it must have 4g + 2 vertices. This was disproved by Cairns, Ozdemir and
Tjaden (1992), where the authors constructed for any genus g ≥ 1 a planar
curve bounding an immersed surface of genus g which has only 6 vertices.
Later, Umehara (1994) showed that this result is optimal.
The comments in this section were taken, with almost no changes, from a letter
written by Mohammad Ghomi.

34

21. History.
Syamadas Mukhopadhyaya was born on June 22, 1866 at Haripal in the district
of Hooghly. After graduating from Hooghly College, he took his M.A. degree
from the Presidency College, Calcutta, and was later awarded the first Doctor
of Philosophy in Mathematics from the Calcutta University, with a thesis titled,
"Parametric Coefficients in the Differential Geometry of Curves in an N-space",
which earned for its author the Griffith Memorial Prize for 1910.

Syamadas Mukhopadhyaya (1866 - 1937)
Mukhopadhyaya began work as a Professor in the Bangabasi College, and some
years later moved to the Bethune College, both in Calcutta. There he lectured
not only on Mathematics, but also on Philosophy and English Literature. He was
later transferred to the Presidency College as Professor of Mathematics. When the
Calcutta Mathematical Society was started in 1909, he was a founding member,
and in 1917 became Vice-President of the Society.

35

All of Mukhopadhyaya's mathematical works had a strong geometric flavor.
He wrote many papers on the geometry of curves in the plane, and his proof of
the Four Vertex Theorem in the case of strictly positive curvature came at the
very beginning of his research career. His work on the geometry of curves in
n-space, the early parts of which were submitted for his doctoral thesis, continued
afterwards, and was published in six parts in the Bulletin of the Calcutta Mathematical Society over a period of years.
After his retirement in 1932, Mukhopadhyaya went to Europe to study methods of
education, and on returning to India wrote a series of memoirs about this. He was
elected President of the Calcutta Mathematical Society, and served in this capacity
until his death from heart failure on May 8, 1937.
"His death has removed from the world of science a man of outstanding genius;
but the intimate circle of his friends, admirers and pupils will remember him not
only as an able Professor and a successful researcher with a deep insight into the
fundamental principals of synthetic geometry but also as a sincere guide,
philosopher, and friend, ever ready to help the poor in distress."
Mukhopadhyaya's obituary appeared in the Bulletin of the Calcutta Mathematical
Society, Vol. 29 (1937), pages 115-120. The comments above were taken from
this obituary, and the final sentence was copied verbatim.

36

Adolf Kneser was born on March 19, 1862 in Grüssow, Germany. He received
his Doctor of Philosophy from the University of Berlin in 1884, with a thesis
"Irreduktibilität und Monodromiegruppe algebraischer Gleichungen" written
under the direction of Leopold Kronecker and Ernst Kummer, and influenced by
Weierstrass. Kneser was appointed to the chair of mathematics in Dorpat, and then
later to the University of Breslau, where he spent the rest of his career.

Adolf Kneser (1862 – 1930)
After his initial interest in algebraic functions and equations, Kneser turned his
attention to the geometry of space curves, and in 1912 proved the Four Vertex
Theorem in the general case of mixed positive and negative curvatures.

37

Adolf's son Hellmuth, born in 1898 while the family was still in Dorpat, followed
in his father's mathematical footsteps, and obtained his doctorate from Gottingen
in 1921 under the direction of David Hilbert, with a thesis titled, "Untersuchungen
zur Quantentheorie". The next year, in 1922, Hellmuth published a new proof of
the Four Vertex Theorem. Hellmuth helped Wilhelm Süss to found the
Mathematical Research Institute at Oberwolfach in 1944, and provided crucial
support over the years to help maintain this world famous institution.
Hellmuth's son Martin continued in the family business, receiving his Ph.D. from
the Humboldt University in Berlin in 1950 under the direction of Erhard Schmidt,
with a thesis titled, "Über den Rand von Parallelkorpern". He spent the early
part of his mathematical career in Munich, and then moved to Gottingen.
Adolf died on January 24, 1930 in Breslau, Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland).
Hellmuth died on August 23 1973 in Tubingen, Germany.
Martin died on February 16, 2004.
The comments above were taken from the online mathematical biographies
at the University of St. Andrews in Scotland, www.history.mcs.st-and.ac.uk .

38

Björn E. J. Dahlberg was born on November 3, 1949 in Sunne, Sweden. He
received his Ph.D. in mathematics from Göteborg University in 1971 with a thesis,
"Growth properties of subharmonic functions", and with Tord Ganelius as advisor.
Dahlberg was 21 at the time, the youngest mathematics Ph.D. in Sweden.

Björn E. J. Dahlberg (1949 – 1998)
Dahlberg's mathematical interests were shaped during his postdoctoral fellowship
year at the Mittag-Leffler Institute in Stockholm, which Lennart Carleson had
recently revitalized. Dahlberg was deeply influenced by Carleson, and participated
in the programs of harmonic analysis and quasi-conformal mappings at the Institute,
while learning about partial differential equations.
One issue of great importance to the mathematical community at that time was to
extend known results in these areas to domains with complicated boundaries. In
1977 Dahlberg showed that, for bounded Lipschitz domains, surface measure on
the boundary and harmonic measure are mutually absolutely continuous, which
implies the solvability of the Dirichlet problem for the Laplacian on such domains.

39

For this work, Dahlberg was awarded the Salem Prize (Paris) in harmonic analysis
in 1978, the Edlund's prize from the Royal Academy of Science in Stockholm in
1979, and was invited to give a 45 minute address at the International Congress of
Mathematicians in Warsaw, Poland in 1982.
In 1980 Dahlberg was appointed to a full professorship at Uppsala University, and
three years later to a full professorship at Göteborg, which remained his home base
for the rest of his life. He traveled a lot, and held visiting faculty positions at the
Universities of Minnesota, Michigan and Texas, at Purdue University and Washington University in St. Louis, at the Universite Paris-Sud, as well as at ETH (Zurich),
Yale, Cal Tech, Chicago and South Carolina.
While in Göteborg, Dahlberg started a project with Volvo on computer aided
geometric design of the surfaces of a car, leading to new theoretical results and a
new design system. In his last years, Dahlberg worked on questions of discrete
geometry connected to his work with Volvo and other companies, as well as to his
older interest in non-smooth domains.
Dahlberg died suddenly on January 30, 1998 from meningitis, an inflammation of
the lining that protects the brain and spinal cord.
The comments above were taken mainly from a letter written by Vilhelm Adolfsson,
one of Dahlberg's Ph.D. students who, along with Peter Kumlin, found Dahlberg's
manuscript on the Converse to the Four Vertex Theorem after his death, edited it,
and submitted it for publication. Ville went on to add some personal notes.
"Björn was a very inspiring and charismatic person. Where other mathematicians
tended to see difficulties, Björn saw possibilities: nothing was impossible! I
remember leaving his office after discussing current problems, I always felt
encouraged and full of enthusiasm. He often cheerfully exclaimed: The sky is the
limit! One might then think that he was overly optimistic, but he was well aware
of the difficulties and the uncertainties. One of his favorite sayings was 'Hindsight
is the only certain science.' "

40

22. Acknowledgments.
The entire mathematical community is indebted to Vilhelm Adolfsson and Peter
Kumlin for rescuing Dahlberg's proof of the Full Converse to the Four Vertex
Theorem, reading and editing it, and shepherding it through to publication. In
addition, we are grateful to Ville for sending us a copy of the proof, to both Ville
and Peter for telling us about Dahlberg's life and work, and to Ville for the detailed
letter which supplied the information for the previous section.
We are enormously grateful to Benjamin Schak and Clayton Shonkwiler, two
graduate students in mathematics at the University of Pennsylvania, for reading the
entire manuscript and making many improvements, as well as for studying and
explaining to us the proofs of Mukhopadhyaya and Kneser.
Special thanks to Mohammad Ghomi for his detailed letter, reproduced with only
minor changes in section 20, about extensions and generalizations of the Four
Vertex Theorem.

41

REFERENCES
1909 S. Mukhopadhyaya, "New methods in the geometry of a plane arc,"
Bull. Calcutta Math. Soc. I, 31-37.
1912 Adolf Kneser, "Bemerkungen über die Anzahl der Extrema des Krümmung
auf geschlossenen Kurven und über verwandte Fragen in einer nicht
eucklidischen Geometrie," Festschrift Heinrich Weber, Teubner, 170-180.
1913 Wilhelm Blaschke, "Die Minimalzahl der Scheitel einer gesclossenen
konvexen Kurve," Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo, 36, 220-222.
1914 Hans Mohrmann, "Die Minimalzahl der Scheitel einer geschlossenen
konvexen Kurve," Rend. Cir. Mat. Palermo, 37, 267-268.
1914 Wolfgang Vogt, "Über monotongekrümmten Kurven," J. Reine Angew.
Math. 144, 239-248.
1916 Wilhelm Blaschke, "Kreis und Kugel," Leipzig, 1916.
1922 Hellmuth Kneser, "Neuer Beweis des Vierscheitelsatzes," Christian Huygens,
2, 315-318.
1928 W. Süss, "Ein Vierscheitelsatz bein geschlossenen Raumkurven," Tohoku
Math. J., Vol. 29, 359-362.
1930 Wilhelm Blaschke, "Vorlesungen über die Differentialgeometrie I,"
3. Aufl. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, see p. 31.
1931 S. Mukhopadhaya, "Extended minimum-number theorems of cyclic and
sextactic points on a plane convex oval," Math. Zeit., 33, 648-662.
1933 David Fog, "Über den Vierscheitelsatz und seine Verallgemeinerungen,"
Sitzungsberichte Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Phys.-Math. Kl., Berlin, 251-254.
1933 Otto Haupt, "Zur Theorie der Ordnung reeler Kurven in der Ebene bezüglich
vorgegebener Kurvenscharen," Monatsh. Math. Phys., 40, 1-53.

42

1934 T. Takasu, "Vierscheitelsatz fur Raumkurven," Tohoku Math. J. Vol. 39,
292-298.
1937 W. C. Graustein, "Extensions of the four-vertex theorem," Trans. Amer.
Math. Soc., 41, 9-23.
1937 W. C. Graustein and S. B. Jackson, "The four-vertex theorem for a certain
type of space curves," Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 43, 737-741.
1940 S. B. Jackson, "The four-vertex theorem for spherical curves," Amer. J.
Math., Vol. 62, 795-812.
1944 S. B. Jackson, "Vertices of plane curves," Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 50,
564-578.
1945 S. B. Jackson, "The four-vertex theorem for surfaces of constant curvature,"
Amer. J. Math. 67, 563-582.
1946 Peter Scherk, "The four-vertex theorem," Proc. First Canadian Math.
Congress, Montreal 1945, Univ. of Toronto Press, Toronto, 97-102.
1952 L. Vietoris, "Ein einfacher Beweis des Vierscheitelsatzes der ebenen Kurven,"
Arch. Math., 3, 304-306.
1958 M. Berner and F. Flohr, "Der Vierscheitelsatz und seine Verallgemeinerung,"
Der Mathematikunterricht, 4, 43-73.
1960 Lester E. Dubins, "Another proof of the four vertex theorem," Amer. Math.
Monthly 67, 573-574.
1961 Dirk Struik, "Lectures on Classical Differential Geometry," 2nd ed.,
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, see p. 48.
1965 Detlef Laugwitz, "Differential and Riemannian Geometry," Academic Press,
New York, see p. 201.

43

1967 Shiing-shen Chern, "Curves and surfaces in euclidean space," MAA Studies
in Math. 4: Studies in Global Geometry and Analysis, Math. Assoc. of
America, Washington, DC, 16-56.
1971 Herman Gluck, "The converse to the four-vertex theorem," L'Enseignement
Math. 17, 295-309.
1972 Herman Gluck, "The generalized Minkowski problem in differential geometry
in the large," Annals of Math., 96, pp. 245-276.
1972 Marcel Berger and Bernard Gostiaux, "Géométrie Différentielle,"
Armand Colin, Paris, see p. 362.
1975 Herman Gluck, "Manifolds with preassigned curvature - a survey,"
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 81, pp. 313-329.
1976 Manfredo do Carmo, "Differential Geometry of Curves and Surfaces,"
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, see p. 37.
1976 Gudlaugur Thorbergsson, "Vierscheitelsatz auf Flächen nichtpositiver
Krümmung," Math. Zeit. 149, No. 1, 47-56.
1978 Wilhelm Klingenberg, "A Course in Differential Geometry," Springer-Verlag,
New York, see p. 28.
1985 Robert Osserman, The Four-or-More Vertex Theorem," Amer. Math.
Monthly, Vol. 92, No. 5, pp. 332 - 337.
1987 Ulrich Pinkall, "On the four-vertex theorem," Aequationes Math. 34, No. 2-3,
221-230.
1992 Grant Cairns, Mehmet Ozdemir, Ekkehard-M. Tjaden, "A counterexample
to a conjecture of U. Pinkall," Topology 31, No. 3, 557-558.
1994 V. D. Sedykh, "Four vertices of a convex space curve," Bull. London
Math. Soc. 26, No. 2, 177-180.

44

1994 Masaaki Umehara, "6-vertex theorem for closed planar curve which bounds
an immersed surface with nonzero genus," Nagoya Math. J. 134, 75-89.
1998 Masao Maeda, "The four-or-more vertex theorems in 2-dimensional space
forms," Nat. Sci. 3, Fac. Educ. Hum. Sci. Yokohama Natl. Univ. No. 1, 43-46.
2000 S. I. R. Costa and M. Firer, "Four-or-more vertex theorems for constant
curvature manifolds," Real and complex singularities (Sao Carlos, 1998)
Res. Notes Math., 412, Chapman and Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 164-172.
2005 Björn Dahlberg, "The Converse of the Four Vertex Theorem,"
edited posthumously by Vilhelm Adolfsson and Peter Kumlin,
Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 133, 2131-2135.
University of Pennsylvania
deturck@math.upenn.edu
gluck@math.upenn.edu
dpomerle@math.upenn.edu
dvick@math.upenn.edu

45

